docs/CLI_USAGE.md, before:

# Cure Programming Language - Command Line Interface

✅ **COMPLETE & WORKING**: The Cure compiler provides a **production-ready** command-line interface for compiling `.cure` source files to BEAM bytecode with **100% functional implementation**.

🎆 **Status**: All CLI features tested and verified working  
✅ **Test Success Rate**: 100% (8/8 test suites passing)  
✅ **Working Examples**: `dependent_types_simple.cure` with full import system

## Installation and Setup

### Prerequisites
- Erlang/OTP 21 or later
- Make (for building)
- rebar3 (for code formatting)
- A Unix-like environment (Linux, macOS, WSL)

### Building the Compiler
```bash
# Build the complete compiler and standard library
make all

# Build only the compiler components
make compiler

# Build and run the test suite
make all && make test

# Build with formatting
make all && make format
```

### Verifying Installation
```bash
# Check CLI is working
./cure --version

# Should output:
# Cure Programming Language Compiler v0.1.0
# Built with Erlang/OTP XX
# Cure is a dependently-typed functional programming language
# for the BEAM virtual machine with built-in finite state machines.

# Check wrapper script functionality
./cure build                    # Should execute 'make all'
./cure test                     # Should execute 'make test'
./cure shell                    # Should start development shell

# Verify compiler modules are loaded
make shell
# In Erlang shell:
# 1> cure_lexer:tokenize(<<"def test() = 42">>).
# 2> cure_parser:parse([...]).
```

## Command Line Usage

### Basic Syntax
```bash
cure [OPTIONS] <input-file.cure>

# Or special wrapper commands:
cure build      # Execute 'make all' to build compiler
cure test       # Execute 'make test' to run test suite
cure clean      # Execute 'make clean' to clean build artifacts
cure shell      # Start Erlang development shell with modules loaded
```

### Examples

#### Basic Compilation
```bash
# Compile a single file
./cure examples/01_list_basics.cure

# Compile with verbose output
./cure examples/04_pattern_guards.cure --verbose

# Specify output file
./cure examples/05_recursion.cure -o my_module.beam

# Specify output directory  
./cure examples/06_fsm_traffic_light.cure -d _build/ebin/

# Compile standard library module
./cure lib/std/core.cure --verbose
./cure lib/std/list.cure --verbose
```

#### Advanced Options
```bash
# Disable optimizations for debugging
./cure examples/complex.cure --no-optimize --verbose

# Skip type checking (for testing parser)
./cure examples/test.cure --no-type-check

# Disable debug information for smaller files
./cure examples/production.cure --no-debug
```

### Command Line Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `-h, --help` | Show help message | - |
| `-v, --version` | Show version information | - |
| `-o, --output <file>` | Output .beam file path | `<input-basename>.beam` |
| `-d, --output-dir <dir>` | Output directory | `_build/ebin` |
| `--verbose` | Enable verbose output | `false` |
| `--no-debug` | Disable debug information | `false` |
| `--no-warnings` | Disable warnings | `false` |
| `--no-type-check` | Skip type checking | `false` |
| `--no-optimize` | Disable optimizations | `false` |

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `CURE_DEBUG=1` | Enable debug stack traces | `0` |

## Compilation Pipeline

The Cure compiler processes files through a multi-stage pipeline:

### 1. Lexical Analysis
Tokenizes Cure source code, recognizing:
- Keywords (`def`, `module`, `fsm`, `if`, `then`, `else`, etc.)
- Operators (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `==`, `->`, etc.) 
- Literals (numbers, strings, atoms)
- Identifiers and type annotations
- Comments and whitespace

### 2. Parsing
Builds an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) from tokens, supporting:
- Module definitions with exports
- Function definitions with dependent types
- Multi-clause functions (Erlang-style pattern matching)
- Record definitions with named fields
- FSM definitions with states and transitions
- Complex expressions (let bindings, conditionals, pattern matching)
- Pattern guards with `when` keyword
- Type specifications and constraints

### 3. Type Checking
Validates type correctness including:
- Dependent type constraints and refinement types
- Function signature matching with polymorphism
- Multi-clause function union type derivation
- Record type field validation and pattern matching
- FSM state type consistency and transition safety
- Type class instance resolution
- Constraint solving with SMT integration
- Pattern guard type checking
- Automatic standard library imports for source files without explicit imports

### 4. Type Optimization
Applies type-directed optimizations:
- Monomorphization of polymorphic functions
- Function specialization for hot paths
- Inlining based on cost/benefit analysis  
- Dead code elimination using type constraints

### 5. Code Generation
Generates BEAM bytecode optimized for:
- Function calls and local variables
- FSM runtime integration with cure_fsm_runtime
- Error handling and debugging with position info
- BEAM virtual machine compatibility
- Integration with Erlang/OTP supervision trees

## Make Integration

The build system provides comprehensive targets for development:

```bash
# Build targets
make all                    # Build complete compiler and stdlib
make compiler               # Build compiler only
make stdlib                 # Build standard library
make tests                  # Build test files

# Testing targets
make test                   # Run complete test suite
make test-basic             # Run basic unit tests
make test-integration       # Run integration tests
make test-performance       # Run performance benchmarks

# File compilation
make compile-file CURE_FILE=examples/simple.cure
make compile-file CURE_FILE=lib/std.cure OUTPUT=custom.beam

# Development utilities
make shell                  # Start Erlang shell with modules loaded
make clean                  # Clean build artifacts
make format                 # Format code with rebar3 fmt
make help                   # Show available targets
```

## Development Commands

The build system integrates with standard development workflows:

```bash
# Development cycle
make clean && make all      # Full rebuild
make format                 # Format Erlang source code
make test                   # Verify functionality

# Interactive development
make shell                  # Start Erlang shell
# 1> cure_lexer:tokenize(<<"def test() = 42">>).
# 2> cure_parser:parse(Tokens).
# 3> cure_typechecker:check_program(AST).

# Performance testing
make test-performance       # Run benchmarks
CURE_DEBUG=1 make test      # Debug test failures
```

## File Structure and Output

### Input Files
- **Extension**: `.cure`
- **Encoding**: UTF-8 text
- **Comments**: Lines starting with `#`

### Output Files
- **Extension**: `.beam`
- **Format**: BEAM bytecode (Erlang Virtual Machine)
- **Location**: `_build/ebin/` by default
- **Size**: Varies (currently mock files for testing)

## Language Support

Cure provides comprehensive support for a dependently-typed functional programming language:

✅ **Fully Supported**
- Function definitions with dependent types and constraints
- **Multi-clause functions** with automatic union type derivation (Erlang-style pattern matching)
- Module definitions with exports and imports
- **Record types** with named fields and type parameters
- FSM definitions with states, transitions, and data constraints
- Dependent types with refinement and constraint solving
- Type classes and instances with automatic derivation
- Pattern matching including dependent patterns
- **Pattern guards** with `when` keyword and logical operators (and, or)
- Let bindings and where clauses
- Conditional expressions and guards
- Higher-order functions and closures
- Standard library (Result, Option, List, Math, String, Pair, Show, Fsm)

✅ **Advanced Features**
- SMT-based constraint solving
- Type-directed optimizations (monomorphization, specialization)
- FSM runtime with supervision tree integration
- Compile-time dependent type checking
- Length-indexed lists and safe array operations
- Error handling with Result types

⚠️ **Experimental**
- Complex type class hierarchies
- Advanced dependent type features (Pi types)
- Linear types for resource management
- Proof obligations and theorem proving integration

🎯 **Platform Integration**
- BEAM bytecode generation
- Erlang/OTP interoperability
- Elixir module calling
- Hot code reloading support

## Error Handling

The compiler provides detailed error messages with:

### Wrapper Script Errors
```
Error: Missing required compiler modules:
  cure_cli.beam
  cure_lexer.beam
Run 'make all' to build all required components.
```

### Lexical Errors
```
Error: Lexical error at line 5: unexpected character '$'
```

### Parse Errors
```
Error: Parse error at line 10: expected 'end' after function definition
```

### Type Errors
```
Error: Type error: Cannot unify Int with String in function add/2
```

### File Errors
```
Error: File not found: examples/nonexistent.cure
Error: Could not write file _build/ebin/test.beam: permission denied
```

### Standard Library Compilation Errors
```
Error: Partial standard library compilation failed: 
Individual compilation of lib/std/broken.cure failed: Parse error at line 5
```

## Performance Considerations

### Compilation Speed
- Small files (< 100 lines): < 1 second
- Medium files (100-1000 lines): 1-5 seconds  
- Large files (1000+ lines): 5-30 seconds

### Memory Usage
- Typical compilation: 10-50 MB RAM
- Large ASTs: up to 200 MB RAM
- Output files: varies by complexity

### Debug Mode
Enabling `CURE_DEBUG=1` may significantly slow compilation due to detailed tracing.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "cure_lexer:scan/1 is not exported"
**Solution**: The CLI was updated to use `cure_lexer:tokenize/1`. Rebuild with `make clean && make all`.

#### "Error: File not found"
**Solution**: Check file path and permissions. Use absolute paths if needed.

#### "Internal error: error:undef"
**Solution**: Missing compiler modules. Run `make all` to build complete compiler.

#### "Missing required compiler modules"
**Solution**: The wrapper script detected missing BEAM files. Run `make all` to build all required components.

#### "Standard library not available"
**Solution**: Standard library modules are missing. The CLI will automatically attempt to compile them. If compilation fails, check for syntax errors in lib/ directory.

#### "Compilation failed at Code Generation"
**Solution**: Current limitation. Code generation is in development. Pipeline works for AST validation.

### Debug Information

Enable debugging for detailed compilation tracing:
```bash
CURE_DEBUG=1 ./cure examples/simple.cure --verbose
```

This will show:
- Cure installation paths
- Command line arguments
- Compilation stage details
- Stack traces on errors

### Getting Help

For issues, bug reports, or feature requests:
1. Check this documentation
2. Run with `--verbose` and `CURE_DEBUG=1`
3. Verify installation with `./cure --version`
4. Check compiler build with `make test`

## Available Examples

The `examples/` directory contains working Cure programs demonstrating key features:

### Basic Examples
- **01_list_basics.cure** - List construction, pattern matching, and recursive operations
- **02_result_handling.cure** - Error handling with Result type (Ok/Error)
- **03_option_type.cure** - Optional value handling with Option type (Some/None)
- **05_recursion.cure** - Recursive functions and tail call patterns

### Advanced Features
- **04_pattern_guards.cure** - Pattern matching with `when` guards
  - Numeric comparisons in guards
  - Logical operators (and, or)
  - Guards with record patterns
  - Complex multi-condition guards

- **06_fsm_traffic_light.cure** - Finite State Machine implementation
  - FSM definition with record payload
  - State transitions and event handling
  - FSM runtime operations (spawn, cast, advertise, state queries)

### Running Examples
```bash
# Compile and examine an example
./cure examples/04_pattern_guards.cure --verbose

# Run FSM example (requires runtime support)
./cure examples/06_fsm_traffic_light.cure

# See examples/README.md for detailed documentation
```

## Future Enhancements

Planned improvements include:
- **Interactive Mode**: REPL for testing expressions
- **Package Management**: Import external Cure libraries
- **IDE Integration**: Language server protocol support
- **Performance Profiling**: Compilation and runtime metrics
- **Cross Compilation**: Target different BEAM platforms

---

*For detailed language documentation, see the main project README, examples directory, and docs/CURE_SYNTAX_GUIDE.md*

Commit message:

Update CURE_SYNTAX_GUIDE.md and CLI_USAGE.md with guard documentation
- CURE_SYNTAX_GUIDE.md: Added Function Guards section with comprehensive examples
  - Documented guard syntax with all operators
  - Added real-world tax bracket example
  - Listed guard features and references comprehensive demo
  - Updated date to November 22, 2025

- CLI_USAGE.md: Added guards to feature list and examples
  - Added function-level guards to fully supported features
  - Distinguished pattern guards vs function guards
  - Added 06_comprehensive_guards_demo.cure to examples section
  - Documented guard sequences and SMT verification

docs/CLI_USAGE.md, after:

# Cure Programming Language - Command Line Interface

✅ **COMPLETE & WORKING**: The Cure compiler provides a **production-ready** command-line interface for compiling `.cure` source files to BEAM bytecode with **100% functional implementation**.

🎆 **Status**: All CLI features tested and verified working  
✅ **Test Success Rate**: 100% (8/8 test suites passing)  
✅ **Working Examples**: `dependent_types_simple.cure` with full import system

## Installation and Setup

### Prerequisites
- Erlang/OTP 21 or later
- Make (for building)
- rebar3 (for code formatting)
- A Unix-like environment (Linux, macOS, WSL)

### Building the Compiler
```bash
# Build the complete compiler and standard library
make all

# Build only the compiler components
make compiler

# Build and run the test suite
make all && make test

# Build with formatting
make all && make format
```

### Verifying Installation
```bash
# Check CLI is working
./cure --version

# Should output:
# Cure Programming Language Compiler v0.1.0
# Built with Erlang/OTP XX
# Cure is a dependently-typed functional programming language
# for the BEAM virtual machine with built-in finite state machines.

# Check wrapper script functionality
./cure build                    # Should execute 'make all'
./cure test                     # Should execute 'make test'
./cure shell                    # Should start development shell

# Verify compiler modules are loaded
make shell
# In Erlang shell:
# 1> cure_lexer:tokenize(<<"def test() = 42">>).
# 2> cure_parser:parse([...]).
```

## Command Line Usage

### Basic Syntax
```bash
cure [OPTIONS] <input-file.cure>

# Or special wrapper commands:
cure build      # Execute 'make all' to build compiler
cure test       # Execute 'make test' to run test suite
cure clean      # Execute 'make clean' to clean build artifacts
cure shell      # Start Erlang development shell with modules loaded
```

### Examples

#### Basic Compilation
```bash
# Compile a single file
./cure examples/01_list_basics.cure

# Compile with verbose output
./cure examples/04_pattern_guards.cure --verbose

# Specify output file
./cure examples/05_recursion.cure -o my_module.beam

# Specify output directory  
./cure examples/06_fsm_traffic_light.cure -d _build/ebin/

# Compile standard library module
./cure lib/std/core.cure --verbose
./cure lib/std/list.cure --verbose
```

#### Advanced Options
```bash
# Disable optimizations for debugging
./cure examples/complex.cure --no-optimize --verbose

# Skip type checking (for testing parser)
./cure examples/test.cure --no-type-check

# Disable debug information for smaller files
./cure examples/production.cure --no-debug
```

### Command Line Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `-h, --help` | Show help message | - |
| `-v, --version` | Show version information | - |
| `-o, --output <file>` | Output .beam file path | `<input-basename>.beam` |
| `-d, --output-dir <dir>` | Output directory | `_build/ebin` |
| `--verbose` | Enable verbose output | `false` |
| `--no-debug` | Disable debug information | `false` |
| `--no-warnings` | Disable warnings | `false` |
| `--no-type-check` | Skip type checking | `false` |
| `--no-optimize` | Disable optimizations | `false` |

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `CURE_DEBUG=1` | Enable debug stack traces | `0` |

## Compilation Pipeline

The Cure compiler processes files through a multi-stage pipeline:

### 1. Lexical Analysis
Tokenizes Cure source code, recognizing:
- Keywords (`def`, `module`, `fsm`, `if`, `then`, `else`, etc.)
- Operators (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `==`, `->`, etc.) 
- Literals (numbers, strings, atoms)
- Identifiers and type annotations
- Comments and whitespace

### 2. Parsing
Builds an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) from tokens, supporting:
- Module definitions with exports
- Function definitions with dependent types
- Multi-clause functions (Erlang-style pattern matching)
- Record definitions with named fields
- FSM definitions with states and transitions
- Complex expressions (let bindings, conditionals, pattern matching)
- Pattern guards with `when` keyword
- Type specifications and constraints

### 3. Type Checking
Validates type correctness including:
- Dependent type constraints and refinement types
- Function signature matching with polymorphism
- Multi-clause function union type derivation
- Record type field validation and pattern matching
- FSM state type consistency and transition safety
- Type class instance resolution
- Constraint solving with SMT integration
- Pattern guard type checking
- Automatic standard library imports for source files without explicit imports

### 4. Type Optimization
Applies type-directed optimizations:
- Monomorphization of polymorphic functions
- Function specialization for hot paths
- Inlining based on cost/benefit analysis  
- Dead code elimination using type constraints

### 5. Code Generation
Generates BEAM bytecode optimized for:
- Function calls and local variables
- FSM runtime integration with cure_fsm_runtime
- Error handling and debugging with position info
- BEAM virtual machine compatibility
- Integration with Erlang/OTP supervision trees

## Make Integration

The build system provides comprehensive targets for development:

```bash
# Build targets
make all                    # Build complete compiler and stdlib
make compiler               # Build compiler only
make stdlib                 # Build standard library
make tests                  # Build test files

# Testing targets
make test                   # Run complete test suite
make test-basic             # Run basic unit tests
make test-integration       # Run integration tests
make test-performance       # Run performance benchmarks

# File compilation
make compile-file CURE_FILE=examples/simple.cure
make compile-file CURE_FILE=lib/std.cure OUTPUT=custom.beam

# Development utilities
make shell                  # Start Erlang shell with modules loaded
make clean                  # Clean build artifacts
make format                 # Format code with rebar3 fmt
make help                   # Show available targets
```

## Development Commands

The build system integrates with standard development workflows:

```bash
# Development cycle
make clean && make all      # Full rebuild
make format                 # Format Erlang source code
make test                   # Verify functionality

# Interactive development
make shell                  # Start Erlang shell
# 1> cure_lexer:tokenize(<<"def test() = 42">>).
# 2> cure_parser:parse(Tokens).
# 3> cure_typechecker:check_program(AST).

# Performance testing
make test-performance       # Run benchmarks
CURE_DEBUG=1 make test      # Debug test failures
```

## File Structure and Output

### Input Files
- **Extension**: `.cure`
- **Encoding**: UTF-8 text
- **Comments**: Lines starting with `#`

### Output Files
- **Extension**: `.beam`
- **Format**: BEAM bytecode (Erlang Virtual Machine)
- **Location**: `_build/ebin/` by default
- **Size**: Varies (currently mock files for testing)

## Language Support

Cure provides comprehensive support for a dependently-typed functional programming language:

✅ **Fully Supported**
- Function definitions with dependent types and constraints
- **Function-level guards** with `when` clauses on function definitions
- **Multi-clause functions** with automatic union type derivation (Erlang-style pattern matching)
- Module definitions with exports and imports
- **Record types** with named fields and type parameters
- FSM definitions with states, transitions, and data constraints
- Dependent types with refinement and constraint solving
- Type classes and instances with automatic derivation
- Pattern matching including dependent patterns
- **Pattern guards** with `when` keyword in match expressions
- **Guard sequences** with logical operators (and, or)
- Let bindings and where clauses
- Conditional expressions and guards
- Higher-order functions and closures
- Standard library (Result, Option, List, Math, String, Pair, Show, Fsm)

✅ **Advanced Features**
- SMT-based constraint solving
- Type-directed optimizations (monomorphization, specialization)
- FSM runtime with supervision tree integration
- Compile-time dependent type checking
- Length-indexed lists and safe array operations
- Error handling with Result types

⚠️ **Experimental**
- Complex type class hierarchies
- Advanced dependent type features (Pi types)
- Linear types for resource management
- Proof obligations and theorem proving integration

🎯 **Platform Integration**
- BEAM bytecode generation
- Erlang/OTP interoperability
- Elixir module calling
- Hot code reloading support

## Error Handling

The compiler provides detailed error messages with:

### Wrapper Script Errors
```
Error: Missing required compiler modules:
  cure_cli.beam
  cure_lexer.beam
Run 'make all' to build all required components.
```

### Lexical Errors
```
Error: Lexical error at line 5: unexpected character '$'
```

### Parse Errors
```
Error: Parse error at line 10: expected 'end' after function definition
```

### Type Errors
```
Error: Type error: Cannot unify Int with String in function add/2
```

### File Errors
```
Error: File not found: examples/nonexistent.cure
Error: Could not write file _build/ebin/test.beam: permission denied
```

### Standard Library Compilation Errors
```
Error: Partial standard library compilation failed: 
Individual compilation of lib/std/broken.cure failed: Parse error at line 5
```

## Performance Considerations

### Compilation Speed
- Small files (< 100 lines): < 1 second
- Medium files (100-1000 lines): 1-5 seconds  
- Large files (1000+ lines): 5-30 seconds

### Memory Usage
- Typical compilation: 10-50 MB RAM
- Large ASTs: up to 200 MB RAM
- Output files: varies by complexity

### Debug Mode
Enabling `CURE_DEBUG=1` may significantly slow compilation due to detailed tracing.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "cure_lexer:scan/1 is not exported"
**Solution**: The CLI was updated to use `cure_lexer:tokenize/1`. Rebuild with `make clean && make all`.

#### "Error: File not found"
**Solution**: Check file path and permissions. Use absolute paths if needed.

#### "Internal error: error:undef"
**Solution**: Missing compiler modules. Run `make all` to build complete compiler.

#### "Missing required compiler modules"
**Solution**: The wrapper script detected missing BEAM files. Run `make all` to build all required components.

#### "Standard library not available"
**Solution**: Standard library modules are missing. The CLI will automatically attempt to compile them. If compilation fails, check for syntax errors in lib/ directory.

#### "Compilation failed at Code Generation"
**Solution**: Current limitation. Code generation is in development. Pipeline works for AST validation.

### Debug Information

Enable debugging for detailed compilation tracing:
```bash
CURE_DEBUG=1 ./cure examples/simple.cure --verbose
```

This will show:
- Cure installation paths
- Command line arguments
- Compilation stage details
- Stack traces on errors

### Getting Help

For issues, bug reports, or feature requests:
1. Check this documentation
2. Run with `--verbose` and `CURE_DEBUG=1`
3. Verify installation with `./cure --version`
4. Check compiler build with `make test`

## Available Examples

The `examples/` directory contains working Cure programs demonstrating key features:

### Basic Examples
- **01_list_basics.cure** - List construction, pattern matching, and recursive operations
- **02_result_handling.cure** - Error handling with Result type (Ok/Error)
- **03_option_type.cure** - Optional value handling with Option type (Some/None)
- **05_recursion.cure** - Recursive functions and tail call patterns

### Advanced Features
- **04_pattern_guards.cure** - Pattern matching with `when` guards
  - Numeric comparisons in guards
  - Logical operators (and, or)
  - Guards with record patterns
  - Complex multi-condition guards

- **06_comprehensive_guards_demo.cure** - Complete function guards demonstration
  - Function-level guards with `when` clauses
  - Multi-clause functions with guards
  - Guard sequences (AND/OR combinations)
  - Type refinement examples
  - Real-world applications (tax brackets, discounts, shipping)
  - SMT-verified guard completeness

- **06_fsm_traffic_light.cure** - Finite State Machine implementation
  - FSM definition with record payload
  - State transitions and event handling
  - FSM runtime operations (spawn, cast, advertise, state queries)

### Running Examples
```bash
# Compile and examine an example
./cure examples/04_pattern_guards.cure --verbose

# Run FSM example (requires runtime support)
./cure examples/06_fsm_traffic_light.cure

# See examples/README.md for detailed documentation
```

## Future Enhancements

Planned improvements include:
- **Interactive Mode**: REPL for testing expressions
- **Package Management**: Import external Cure libraries
- **IDE Integration**: Language server protocol support
- **Performance Profiling**: Compilation and runtime metrics
- **Cross Compilation**: Target different BEAM platforms

---

*For detailed language documentation, see the main project README, examples directory, and docs/CURE_SYNTAX_GUIDE.md*
